//  Input from Wade

As a first volley, I can outline my first impression.  It seems we're
being asked to advise on two items: (1) the extent and nature of
computational skills currently being taught in PA courses, and (2) the
need/feasibility/desire for physics major programs where
computation/modeling play a large role.  Before going too deeply down
this rabbit hole, I have a few open-ended questions:

-- Is formal training of computational skills the most effective way
   to educate?  At the lower levels, I suspect so.  But where do
   things become too specific to be universally useful?

-- Is a computational physics major belong in PA or CMSE?  Or should
   this be joint in some manner?  There is a computational math major,
   is that coordinated outside the math dept at all?

-- An underlying current is likely to be how we integrate
   computational skill training in our existing physics courses and
   whether this is keeping up with the modern demands of the field(s).
   Do we want to tackle that?

//  Input from Danny

Thanks for starting the conversation. 

I would like piggyback off what you proposed and suggest that we might
start our work by consider what (as Wade put it) computational skills
we intend for our students to develop over the course of the
major. This might lead to some ideas of where to include the
development and, I'd argue, how to do that inclusion (i.e., what is
the appropriate pedagogy).

I agree that the charge is rather vague, but I have personal
experience (and, from my knowledge, so do Brian and Morten, maybe
others?) in working on these kinds of broader curriculum projects. So
I suspect we might be able to have a conversation about what the
process might look like for the committee and then leap into the first
aspect of that process at this first meeting.

// Input from Brian

Hi all,

I think that the list of questions Wade has brought up are good ones
and are definitely some of the things that we should talk about.
Prior to meeting, we might want to try to collect some information
about the various places that computation enters the undergraduate and
graduate curriculum.  I know of some specific classes where that’s
done, but my guess is that there’s a greater diversity of that sort of
thing than I’m aware of.  I’m happy to talk to the astrophysics
faculty - I know that Ed Brown and Laura Chomiuk have spent a lot of
time integrating programming and modeling into AST 208.

I would also urge you all to take a look at the AAPT “AAPT
Recommendations for Computational Physics in the Undergraduate Physics
Curriculum” document that was released in October:

  https://www.aapt.org/Resources/upload/AAPT_UCTF_CompPhysReport_final_B.pdf

It includes recommendations for learning goals, skills, and tools
intended for undergraduate physics education, and was developed by the
AAPT in consultation with many members of the physics community
(including Danny and myself, in the interests of full disclosure).  I
think that it will help to inform our discussion quite a bit!

Also, regarding a computational physics major and its interactions
with CMSE… let’s discuss that in person rather than over email.  I’m
also happy to talk about the direction that CMSE intends to go with
its scientific computing and data science degrees, and the rough
timetable for those.

// Input from Carlo

Hi all, yes I agree that before the meeting we should gather more
information on how our colleagues integrate computation in their UG/G
teaching. I will do that for the CMP group and report to the
committee. Maybe each of us could do it for the respective PA
groups. Since we are focusing also on the graduate curriculum, I think
we should ask about how computation enters in their research
activities as well, so to have a better idea of common needs for
grads.

