TITLE: Executive Summary: Computational Physics at the Physics and Astronomy Department, Michigan State University
AUTHOR: Danny Caballero, Sean Couch, Wade Fisher, Connor Glosser, Nat Hawkins, Morten Hjorth-Jensen, Claire Kopenhafer, Brian O'Shea, and Carlo Piermarocchi
DATE: today

===== Motivation =====

Modern scientists increasingly rely on computational modeling and data
analysis to explore and to understand the natural world.  Given its
ubiquitous use in science and its critical importance to the future of
engineering, computational modeling has been called the "third leg" of
21st century science, next to theory and experiment.  This is
particularly true in physics, where many important recent advances in
our understanding of the physical world have been driven by
large-scale computational modeling and data analysis - for example,
the 2012 discovery of the Higgs boson, the 2013 Nobel Prize in
chemistry for computational modeling of molecules (received by
biophysicists), and the 2016 discovery of gravitational waves.  It has
become clear that a large fraction of theoretical and experimental
physicists require a high level of computational sophistication to
competently pursue many aspects of their work - a trend that is likely
to grow with time as computers increase in power and experimental
datasets grow exponentially. "By 2020, it is also expected that one
out of every two jobs in the STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics) fields will be in
computing":"http://pathways.acm.org/executive-summary.html"
(Association for Computing Machinery, 2013).


Beyond its increasing centrality in research, the use of computational
modeling in the classroom setting provides students with insights that
are complementary to those resulting from pencil-and-paper
manipulation of equations.  In particular, the ability to closely
examine the behavior of systems that are too complex to be easily
analytically tractable, or that have no analytic solutions (i.e., many
systems of practical interest), helps to develop intuition that is
unavailable to many students from analytic calculation.

More broadly, computational modeling and data analysis is core to a
variety of non-academic career paths that are often pursued by physics
students following the receipt of their Bachelor's degree. A 2012 AIP
survey of almost 5,000 recent physics bachelor's degree recipients
indicated that roughly 50% chose to enter the workforce immediately
after receiving their undergraduate degree.  Of these, roughly 75% go
into STEM-related fields including engineering, software development,
or information technology.  Depending on the specific sub-field,
between 60% and 80% of these individuals regularly need to engage in
computer programming or simulation/modeling tasks. Many respondents to
the survey stressed the importance of computer skills, including
programming, in increasing their marketability to potential employers.

Despite the ubiquity of computational modeling and data analysis by
physicists in both academia and industry and its utility as a means of
building physical intuition, the MSU undergraduate physics curriculum
does not require its majors to learn these crucial skills (although
there is optional coursework in computational methods in PHY 102 and
PHY 480).  In recent years, individual faculty have integrated
computation into various upper-division courses targeted at physics
majors, which is an important step forward - however, these efforts
are highly dependent on the individual faculty teaching the course,
and are largely uncoordinated.

For all of the reasons outlined above, it is critical to ensure that
students graduating from MSU with a physics degree have mastery of a
range of skills relating to computational modeling, data analysis, and
visualization, as well as computer programming and software
development.  Furthermore, to ensure that students have a consistent
and positive experience learning these subjects, it is important that
computation is integrated into the undergraduate physics curriculum in
a way that is consistent over time and between courses, and which
facilitates a gradual progression in students' computational skill
sets.

===== Proposal =====

By early in the Fall 2018 term or late Spring 2018 (in time to make any necessary curricular changes for the 2019-20 academic year), this committee will present a document to the faculty of the Department of Physics and Astronomy that: (1) outlines proposed learning outcomes relating to computational modeling and data analysis within the upper-division physics curriculum, (2) offers a concrete and realistic plan of action that will allow us to attain these learning outcomes, and (3) provides a plan to assess the progress of our efforts.  Prior to Spring 2018/Fall 2018, the committee will pursue several goals.  We will:

o  Engage the faculty in the department to understand current best practices, to identify areas of concern, and to solicit ideas for desired learning outcomes and curriculum modifications.
o  Survey current undergraduate students to understand their experiences thus far and identify the types of training that they would like to receive with regards to these subjects.
o  Survey students who recently received a bachelor's degree in physics or astrophysics to identify what aspects of their education have been useful to them thus far, and what they would have liked to have learned while here at MSU.
o  Identify possible areas of collaboration with the Department of Computational Mathematics, Science and Engineering, and explore the possibility of more in-depth educational options (i.e., a computational physics degree).
o  Contact faculty at other institutions that have pursued similar reform efforts to learn about potential opportunities and pitfalls.
o  Synthesize the results obtained from the previous points into a coherent document that will be presented to the faculty for discussion.

This proposal will provide a foundation upon which the Department could serve as a leader among large physics departments -- ushering in an integrated 21st century physics curriculum, which is the first of its kind in the Big 10 and, arguably, the first among AAU institutions. Depending on the outcomes of the investigations described above, this proposal may include recommendations to integrate computational elements to some or all of the required 300- and 400-level courses (PHY 321, 410, 451, 471, and 481) over some reasonable period of time. This work can be supported by our unique connection with CMSE, which allow us to leverage the Department's recent decision to require physics students to take CMSE 201 ("Introduction to Computational Modeling") prior to PHY 321 ("Classical Mechanics I") in order to build on students' developing computational knowledge. Furthermore, the Department is home to the Physics Education Research Lab, which can help document the transition and support the evaluation of consensus-driven learning outcomes -- further solidifying the Department as a 21st century leader in physics education among peer institutions. We strongly encourage faculty who are interested in sharing their views on this subject to contact any of the members of the committee in person or via email!

===  More material for reading and discussions ===

This committee has also drafted a longer document which addresses
computational learning outcomes in more detail, lists examples of
computational projects and topics that can be included in specific
courses as well as other proposals meant to enhance computing in
physics education. The longer document is meant as an input to the
discussions. Please feel free to "read more at this
link":"https://compphysics.github.io/PAComputationsMSU/doc/pub/Draft/html/Draft-bs.html"
or "look up the Github
repository":"https://github.com/CompPhysics/PAComputationsMSU". We
will keep editing this document and welcome very much your inputs. You
may also consult a "longer article written by two of us (DMC and
MHJ)":"http://lanl.arxiv.org/abs/1802.08871". In this reference the
authors discuss how to develop a physics curriculum for undergraduate
students that includes computing as a central element. The article contains several examples of numerical exercises/projects that can be incldued in Physics courses.
